# Syntax & Semantics

# Syntax

The syntax of the PRISM property specification language subsumes various probabilistic temporal logics, including PCTL, CSL, (probabilistic) [[5.1 Linear Temporal Logic (LTL)| LTL]], PCTL* and [[6.2.1 Syntax of CTL|CTL]]


Informally, the syntax can be summarised as follows: a property can be any valid, well-typed PRISM [[0.1.7 Expressions| expression]]which (optionallu) also includes the probabilistic operators discussed previously (**P, S** and **R**) and the non-probabilistic (CTL) ones (**A** and **E**). This mean that any of the following operators can be used:

- `-` (unary minus)
- `*`, `/` (multiplication, division)
- `+`, `-` (addition, subtraction)
- `<`, `<=`, `>=`, `>` (relational operators)
- `=`, `!=` (equality operators)
- `!` (negation)
- `&` (conjunction)
- `|` (disjunction)
- `<=>` (if-and-only-if)
- `=>` (implication)
- `?` (condition evaluation: `condition ? a : b` means "if `condition` is true then `a` else `b`")
- **P** (probabilistic operator)
- **S** (steady-state operator)
- **R** (reward operator)
- **A** (for-all operator)
- **E** (there-exists operator)



This allows you to write any property expressible in logics such as PCTL and CSL. For example, CSL allows you to nest **P** and **S** operators:

```c
P=? [ F>2 S>0.9[ num_servers >= 5 ] ]  
```

"the probability of it taking more than 2 hours to get to a state from which the long-run probability of at least 5 servers being operational is >0.9"

You can also express various arithmetic expressions such as:

```c
1 - P=? [ F[3600,7200] oper ]  
```

"the probability that the system is **not** operational at any point during the second hour of operation"

```c
R{"oper"}=? [ C<=t ] / t  
```

"the expected fraction of time that the system is available (i.e. the expected interval availability) in the time interval [0, t]"

```c
P=? [ F fail_A ] / P=? [ F any_fail ]  
```

"the (conditional) probability that component A eventually fails, given that at least one component fails"

## Semantics

We omit a formal presentation of the semantics of the PRISM property language. The semantics of the probabilistic temporal logics that the language incorporates can be found from a variety of sources. 

It is worth, however, clarifying a few points specific to PRISM. A property is evaluated with respect **to a particular state of a model**. Depending on the type of the property, this value may either be a Boolean, an integer or a double. **When performing model checking, PRISM usually has to actually compute the value for *all states* of the model but, for clarity, will by default report just a single value.** Typically, this is the value for the (single) initial state of the model. For example, this:

```c
P=? [F "error"]
```

will report the probability, **from the initial state** of the model, of reaching an "error" state. This:

```c
P>0.5 [ F "error" ]
```

will return `true` if and only if the probability, from the initial state, is greater than 0.5.

For models with [[0.1.9 Multiple Initial States| multiple initial states]] we need to adapt these definitions slightly. In this case, the two properties above will yield, respectively:

- The range of values (over all initial states) of the probability of reaching "error"
- `true`if and only if the probability is greater than 0.5 from *all* initial states.

You can also ask PRISM to return different values using [[0.2.12 Filters|filters]] which are described in the next section.