# The P Operator

One of the most important operators in the PRISM property specification language is the **P operator**, which is used to reason about the probability of an event's occurrence. This operator was originally proposed in the logic *PCTL* but also features in the other logics supported by PRISM, such as *CSL*. The **P operator** is applicable to all types of models supported by PRISM.

Informally, the property:


``` c
P bound [ pathprop ]
```

Is *true* in a state **s** of a model if "the probability that path property `pathprop`is satisfied by the paths from state **s** meets the bound `bound`". A typical example of a bound would be:


``` c
P>0.98 [ pathprop ]
```

which means: "the probability that `pathprop`is satisfied by the paths from state **s** is great than 0.98". More precisely, `bound`can be any of this:
- >=p
- >p
- <=p
- < p

where `p` is a PRISM language expression evaluating to a double in the range [0,1].

## Nondeterminism

For models that can exhibit nondeterministic behaviour, such as MDPs or PTAs, some additional clarifications are necessary. Whereas for fully probabilistic models such as DTMCs and CTMCs, **probability measures over paths are well defined** (see e.g. [KSK76]((https://www.prismmodelchecker.org/manual/Main/References#KSK76)and [BKH99](https://www.prismmodelchecker.org/manual/Main/References#BKH99), respectively).

Hence, the actual meaning of the property P `bound` [ `pathprop` ] in these cases is: "the probability that `pathprop` is satisfied by the paths from state **s** meets the bound `bound` *for all possible resolutions of nondeterminism*". This means that, properties using the **P operator** then effectively reason about the *minimum or maximum probability*, over all possible resolutions of nondeterminism, that a certain type of behaviour is observed. This depends on the bound attached to the **P operator:** a lower bound (> or >=) relates to minimum probabilities and an upper bound (< or <=) to maximum probabilities.

## Quantitative properties

It is also very often useful to take a *quantitative* approach to probabilistic model checking, computing the actual probability that some behaviour of a model is observed, rather than just verifying whether or not the probability is above or below a given bound. Hence, PRISM allows the **P operator** to take the following form:


```c
P=? [ pathprop ]
```

These properties return a numerical rather than a Boolean value. The [[0.2.6 The S Operator|S]] and [[0.2.7 Reward-based properties|R]] operators, discussed later, can also be used in this way.

As mentioned above, for nondeterministic models (MDPs or PTAs), either minimum or maximum probability values can be computed. Therefore, in this case, we have two possible types of property:


```c
Pmin=? [ pathprop ]  
Pmax=? [ pathprop ]
```


It is also possible to specify **to which state the probability returned by a quantitative property refers**. This is covered in the later section on [[0.2.12 Filters|filters]]



