# Loading & Building a Model
Typically, when using PRISM, the first step is to load a model that has been specified in the PRISM modelling language. If using the GUI, select menu option "Model | Open Model" and choose a file. There are a selection of sample PRISM model files in the prism-examples directory of the distribution. A few very small models are contained in the subdirectory simple; the rest are in subdirectories grouped by model type.

## Building the model

In order to perform model checking, PRISM will (in most cases) need to construct the corresponding probabilistic model, i.e. convert the PRISM model description to, for example, an MDP, DTMC, etc. During this process, PRISM computes the set of states in the model which are reachable from the initial states and the transition matrix which represents the model.

Model construction is done automatically when you perform model checking. However, you may always want to explicitly ask PRISM to build the model in order to test for errors or to see how large the model is. From the GUI, you can do this by by selecting "Model | Build Model". If there are no errors during model construction, the number of states and transitions in the model will be displayed in the bottom left corner of the window.

## Deadlocks

You should be aware of the possibility of _deadlock states_ (or _deadlocks_) in the model, i.e. states which are reachable but from which there are no outgoing transitions. **PRISM will automatically search your model for deadlocks and, by default, "fix" them by adding self-loops in these states**. Since deadlocks are sometimes caused by modelling errors, PRISM will display a warning message in the log when deadlocks are fixed in this way.

You can control whether deadlocks are automatically fixed in this way using the "Automatically fix deadlocks" option (or with command-line switches `-nofixdl` and `-fixdl`). When fixing is disabled, PRISM will report and error when the model contains deadlocks (this used to be the default behaviour in older versions of PRISM).

If you have unwanted or unexpected deadlocks in your model, there are several ways you can detect then. Firstly, by disabling deadlock fixing (as described above), PRISM will display a list of deadlock states in the log. Alternatively, you can model check the [[0.2.12 Filters|filter]] property `filter(print, "deadlock")`, which has the safe effect.

To find out _how_ deadlocks occur, i.e. which paths through the model lead to a deadlock state, there are several possibilities. Firstly, you can model check the [[0.2.10 Non-probabilistics Properties|CTL]] property `E [F "deadlock"]`. When checked from the GUI, this will provide you with the option of display a path to a deadlock in the simulator. From the command-line, for example with: