# Parametric Model Checking

Often, PRISM models contain [[0.1.8 Constants]], representing parameters of the system being modelled, which define for example the transition probabilities in the model. In order to perform model checking, these constants have to be assigned concrete values. PRISM also allows [[0.3.6 Experiments]], where model checking is performed for a range of different values for the constants.

PRISM's _parametric model checking_ functionality, however, provides a more powerful method for analyzing probabilistic models whose transition probabilities are specified as functions over a set of parameters. Depending on the property under consideration, the result is then given as either a rational function over the parameters or as a mapping from regions of these parameters to rational functions or truth values. This function (or functions) can then be used to, for example:

- plot a graph showing hot the parameter affects the result of the property, or
- use optimisation methods to find parameter values that minimise or maximise the result.

---
Parameters are specified as undefined constants in the model file, e.g.:

```c
const double x;
```

These parameters can only be used to describe probabilities (or rates). For example:

```c
[] s=0 -> x : (s'=1) + 1-x : (s'=2);
```

They may not be used in guards or updates. The parametric definitions of probabilities or rates (e.g. `x` and `1-x` in the above) must be rational functions (fractions of polynomials). PRISM currently supports parametric versions of discrete-time Markov chains (DTMCs), continuous-time Markov chains (CTMCs) and Markov decision processes (MDPs). The classes of properties that be checked on these models are as follows:

- parametric DTMCs/CTMCs: unbounded until, steady-state probabilities, reachability reward and steady-state reward;

- parametric MDPs: unbounded until and reachability rewards.

**Currently, parametric model checking can only be performed from the command-line.** This is done by using the switch `-param <vals>`, where `<vals>` lists the undefined constants that should be treated as parameters. A range of possible values should also be provided for each parameter, in the form `<parameter>=<lower-bound>:<upper-bound>`. For example: