# Exporting the Model

If required, once the model has been constructed, it can be exported, either for manual examination or for use in another tool. The following can all be exported:
- the set of reachable states;
- the transition matrix;
- the state rewards vector(s);
- the transition reward matrix (or matrices);
- labes (in the [[0.1.11 Formulas and Labels|model]] or [[0.2.13 Properties Files|properties]]) and the states that satisfy them

From the GUI, use the "Model | Export" menu to export the data to a file or, for small models, use the "Model | View" menu to print the details directly to the log. For the case of labels, if you want to export labels from the properties file too, use the "Properties | Export labels" option, rather than the "Model | Export" one.

## Export options

When exporting model details in this way, the precision of numerical values (e.g., for probabilities or rewards) can be configured. From the command line, use the switch `-exportmodelprecision <x>` to show values to `<x>` significant digits. The same setting is available for exports from the GUI via option "Precision of model export".

## File Formats

By default, model data is exported (or displayed) in plain text format. The precise details of the formats used can be found in the "[Explicit Model Files](https://www.prismmodelchecker.org/manual/Appendices/ExplicitModelFiles)" appendix. As mentioned above, by convention, we use file extensions `.sta` (for states files), `.tra` (for transitions files), `.srew` and `.trew` (for state/transition rewards files) and `.lab` (for labels).

## Graphical model export

The transition matrix of the model can also be exported in [Dot](http://www.graphviz.org/) format, which allows easy graphical visualisation of the graph structure of the model. You can optionally request that state descriptions are added to each state of graph; if not, states are labelled with integer indices that can be cross-referenced with the list of reachable states.
