# Statistical Model Checking

The discrete-event simulator built into PRISM ([[0.3.2 Debugging Models with the Simulator]]) can also be used to generate *approximate* results for PRISM properties, a technique often called ***statistical model checking***. Essentially, this is achieved by *sampling*: generating a large number of random path through the model, evaluating the result of the given properties on each run, and using this information to generate an approximately correct result. 

This approach is particularly useful on very large models when normal model checking is infeasible. This is because discrete-event simulation is performed using the PRISM language model description, without explicitly constructing the corresponding probabilistic model.

> **Currently, statistical model checking can only be applied to `P` or `R`operators and does not support LTL-style path properties or [[0.2.12 Filters|filters]]**

To use this functionality, load a model and some properties into PRISM, as described in the previous sections. To generate an approximate value for one or more properties, select them in the list, right-click and select "*Simulate*". As usual, it is first necessary to provide values for any undefined constants. 

Here, the state from which approximate values are to be computed (i.e. from which the paths will be generated) can be selected. **By default, this is the initial state of the model.** The other settings in the dialog concern the methods used for simulation.

---

PRISM supports four different methods for performing statistical model checking:
- CI (Confidence Interval)
- ACI (Asymptotic Confidence Interval)
- APMC (Approximate Probabilistic Model Checking)
- SPRT (Sequential Probability Ratio Test)

The **first three** of these are intended primarly for [[0.2.3 The P Operator|quantitative]]properties (e.g. of the form `P=?[...]`), but can also be used for "bounded" properties (e.g. of the form `P<p[...]`). The SPRT method is only applicable  to "bounded" properties.


Each method has several parameters that control its execution, i.e. the number of samples that are generated and the accuracy of the computed approximation. In most cases, these parameters are inter-related so one of them must be left unspecified and its value computed automatically based on the others. In some cases, this is done before simulation; in others, it must be done afterwards.

