# Computation Tree Logic (CTL)

A prominent branching temporal logic for specifying system properties. The **core recursive algorithm** is presented that is based on a *bottom-up* traversal of the parse tree of the formula at hand. This is followed by an algorithm for the generation of counterexamples. 


## Recap of LTL

**LTL** is called linear, because the ***qualitative notion of time is path-based*** and viewed to be linear: at each moment of time there is *only one possible successor* state and thus each time moment has a unique possible future. Technically speaking, this follows from the fact that the interpretation of LTL formulae is defined in terms of path, i.e., sequence of states.

Paths themselves, though, are obtained from a transition system that might be **branching: a state may have several, distinct direct successor states**, and thus several computations may start in a state. **But,  LTL only evaluates one computation at a time. This means that you cannot directly express the possibility of having several alternative futures; you can only talk about what happens in a linear sequence of states.Artificial intelligence. **

The interpretation of LTL-formulae in a state requires that a formula $\LARGE \varphi$ holds in state *s* if *all* possible computations that start in *s* satisfy $\LARGE \varphi$. The universal quantification over all computations that is implicit in the LTL semantics can also be made explicit in the formula, e.g.:

$\large s \models \forall\varphi$ if and only iff $\large\pi  \models \varphi$ for all paths $\large\pi$ starting in $\large s$    


## Existential quantification problem

In LTL, we thus can state properties over all possible computations that start in a state (universal computation), but not easily about *some* of such computations (existential computation). To some extent this may be overcome by exploiting the duality between universal and existential quantification. For instance, to check whether $\large s \models\forall\neg\varphi$: if this formula is not satisfied by *s*, then there must be a computation that meets $\LARGE \varphi$, otherwise they should all refute $\LARGE \varphi$.

## Limitations of LTL

For more complicated properties, like "for every computation it is always possible to return to the initial state", this is, however, not possible. A naive attempt would be to require $\LARGE \square\Diamond start$ for every computation, i.e., $\large s\models\forall\square\Diamond start$, where the proposition *start* uniquely identifies the initial state. This is, however, too strong as it requires a computation to *always* return to the initial state, not just *possibly*. Other attempts to specify the intended property also fail, and it even turns out to be the case that the property cannot be specified in LTL.


## Branching-time
To overcome these problems, in the early eighties another strand of temporal logics for specification and verification purposes was introduced. The semantics of this kind of temporal logic is not based on a linear notion of time —an infinite sequence of states— but on a *branching* notion of time—an infinite *tree* of states.

Branching time refers to the fact that at each moment there may be several different possible futures. Each moment of time may thus split into several possible futures. The semantics of a branching temporal logic is defined in terms of an infinite, directed *tree* of states rather than an infinite sequence.

**Each traversal of the tree starting in its root represents a single path**. The tree itself thus represents all possible paths, and is directly obtained from a transition system by "unfolding" at the state of interest. 

## Temporal Operators

The temporal operators in branching temporal logic allow the expression of properties of ***some*** or ***all*** computations that start in a state. To that end, it supports and **existential** path quantifier (denoted $\large \exists$) and a **universal** path quantifier (denoted $\large \forall$). For instance, the property $\large \exists\Diamond\Phi$ denotes that **there exists a computation along which** $\large \Diamond\Phi$ **holds**. That is, it states that there is at least one possible computation in which a state that satisfies $\large \Phi$ is **eventually reached**. 

This does not, however, exclude the fact that there can also be computations for which this property does not hold, for instance, computations for which $\large \Phi$ is always refuted. 

The property $\large \forall\Diamond\Phi$, in contrast, **states that all computations satisfy the property** $\large \Diamond\Phi$. More complicated properties can be expressed by nesting universal and existential path quantifiers. For instance, the aforementioned property *"for every computation it is always possible to return to the initial state"* can be faithfully expressed by $\large \forall\square\exists\Diamond\Phi start$: in any state ($\large \square$) of any possible computation ($\large \forall$), there is a possibility ($\large \exists$) to eventually return to the start state ($\large \Diamond start$)

